President Xi Jinping addresses a meeting marking the 70th anniversary of the Chinese People's Volunteers entering the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to fight in the War to Resist U.S. Aggression and Aid Korea in Beijing, capital of China, Oct. 23, 2020. https://t.co/23CGASUGRS
8 months after the founding of the New China, the Korean War broke out in June 1950. The flames of war reached the border river of Yalu, U.S. planes repeatedly bombed northeast China's border regions, causing casualties &amp; property losses &amp; seriously endangering China's security.
On Oct. 19, 1950, as requested by the DPRK, CPV forces crossed the Yalu River to aid the DPRK's fight there until a truce was signed in 1953.
It was a time when New China was still poor, with unfavorable weapons and weak air and navy forces. But the United States, which led the rival forces in the war, had much greater military power.
Calling the CPV entering the Korean front in the War to Resist U.S. Aggression and Aid Korea a just move of an army for justice, Xi lauded the great patriotism demonstrated by them.

Xi said all those who had contributed to the victory of the war have never been forgotten.
The forces of China and the DPRK defeated their armed-to-teeth rival and shattered the myth of invincibility of the U.S. army, Xi said.
The great victory in the war defied the invasion and expansion of imperialism, safeguarded the security of New China, stabilized the situation on the Korean Peninsula and upheld peace in Asia and the world, he said.
In his speech, Xi called the war victory "a declaration that the Chinese people have stood firm in the East, and an important milestone in the Chinese nation's march toward the great rejuvenation."
It smashed the aggressors' plot to nip New China in the bud, and helped Chinese people completely get rid of the label of the "Sick Man of East Asia," Xi said.

It advanced the modernization of China's national defense and the armed forces, Xi said.
The war victory laid a solid foundation for New China's important status in Asia and on international affairs, demonstrating the Chinese people's resolve to safeguard world peace, Xi said.
Profound changes occurred to the strategic landscape of Asia and even the world following the war, which, Xi said, has shown that justice is sure to prevail over power.
Elaborating the great spirit, Xi said the CPV members have always upheld patriotism by placing the interests of the motherland and the people above all and defying personal danger to safeguard the dignity of the motherland and the Chinese nation;
upheld revolutionary heroism with their bravery and acts of valor; upheld revolutionary optimism by demonstrating high morale despite hardships and difficulties; upheld revolutionary loyalty by sacrificing themselves to complete missions assigned by the motherland and people;
upheld internationalism by striving for the cause of peace and justice of humanity.
"It is necessary to speak to invaders in the language they know: that is, a war must be fought to deter invasion, and a victory is needed to win peace and respect," Xi said.
Xi urged efforts to uphold the Party's leadership, put ppl first, boost economic &amp; social development, advance the modernization of national defense &amp; the armed forces, as well as uphold world peace &amp; justice &amp; promote the building of a community with a shared future for mankind.
Seeking peaceful development and win-win cooperation is the right way forward as people of all countries need to join hands to overcome difficulties and meet challenges facing the world, Xi said.
"In today's world, the pursuit of unilateralism, protectionism &amp; extreme egoism leads nowhere.

Blackmail, blockages &amp; the app of max pressure on others lead nowhere.

Arrogance, always doing as one pleases, acts of hegemony, overbearance or bullying will lead nowhere," Xi said.
Calling the Chinese military a staunch defender of world peace, Xi said China never seeks hegemony or expansion and firmly opposes hegemonism and power politics.
"China will never sit idly by and allow its national sovereignty, security and development interests to be undermined, and will never allow any individual or force to impair or divide this sacred territory," Xi said.
Chinese ppl are confidently looking forward to the bright prospects of nat'l rejuvenation, Xi said, urging the ppl to carry forward the spirit forged in the war 70 yrs ago, march on the journey of building a great modern socialist country &amp; achieve the goal of nat'l rejuvenation.
