#Greece #Turkey #Athen #Border #Refugees

-THREADE-

Greece is strengthening the security systems at the land and sea borders with Turkey. Behind this is probably the fear of a new influx of migrants.  Five meters high, 27 kilometers long, 63 million euros expensive:
Greece is arming itself with massive barriers on the Evros river against the feared new migrant flows from Turkey. Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis inspected the construction work over the weekend.
The Greek land border with Turkey is 206 kilometers long. For the most part, but not continuously, it follows the course of the Evros River (Turkish: Meric). The Evros was the scene of a week-long trial of strength in the spring:
At the end of February, the Turkish head of state Recep Tayyip Erdogan declared the border with Greece open. Tens of thousands of migrants were brought in buses to the Pazarkule / Kastanies crossing in order to besiege the border.
Erdogan threatens to send "millions" of migrants to Europe. With this he wanted to achieve financial concessions from the EU. But the plan failed, the Greeks defended their borders. At the end of March, the Turkish authorities had the besiegers brought back inland by bus.
The new fence will be erected on three previously less secure sections, where the border does not follow the Evros but runs over land. The barriers consist of massive, five meter high steel elements anchored vertically in the ground.
An eleven-kilometer-long metal fence on the Evros, which was built in 2012, will be reinforced and raised from 3.50 to 4.30 meters.  The armed forces also built eight new watchtowers.
Prime Minister Mitsotakis also wants to strengthen the border police on Evros with 400 additional officers. Like the land border on Evros, Greece also wants to better secure the sea border in the Aegean Sea.
To this end, the coast guard is planning to set up a new observation system. Its main purpose is to prevent irregular migration from the Turkish coast to the Greek islands. The system will consist of 35 stationary radar stations with ranges of up to 90 kilometers,
thermal imaging cameras and drones. The observation data are evaluated in real time in two control centers of the coast guard and the armed forces in Athens. The orders for the monitoring system are to be put out to tender in the coming year.
