I know it's 7:30am on a Saturday but I've had the most bizarre experience last night that I just have to talk to someone about because back home no one literally understands what I'm talking about. I was out in my hometown last night, and at one point my friend asks me about /1
Mask wearing and literally says “omg I've seen you continental Europeans have to wear mask! Did you have one??” As if I had arrived from another planet. I realize that the piece of fabric still in my left coat pocket has been my everyday routine for the past 4-5 months /2
It's been my ticket out of my house and on an airplane and I've washed and dried these masks daily. And here I am speaking to someone who's never even put it on because they never *had* to. They'd heard this pandemic but other than that /3
It's not affected their daily life any more than fewer tourists. It's as if I had arrived with my mask from a foreign planet and they were all curious to hear what my hell has looked like for the past 9 months /4
I put on the mask to show them and as I do the bartender comes by to take an order and he's like laughing saying “haha yes coronavirus! Haha” like jokingly acknowledging this mask. Since arriving here all I've spoken about is covid and I'm driving everyone mad /5
My aunt even told me at one point “you've spoken more about covid in the past hour than I have done the whole year! Change the subject” and all this while this pandemic has quite literally controlled my entire life and fucked up my entire routine for the past year /6
I realize coming home what a vacuum I've lived in and how I cannot speak or think of anything else all whilst these people have gone on with their daily life as normal. I feel almost resentment. Anger. I've come back and I sound crazy to everyone I speak to.  /7
I've realize unfortunately how much this virus and pandemic has controlled my daily life and the actions I take and what I do, because I live in a place affected by it. Hearing myself speak these past couple of days, I realize how it's occupied and taken over my entire life /8
I think in restrictions, what am I allowed to do, how long am I allowed to do it. How many people at a table. How many people at home. I wake up and go to sleep only thinking in RULES. /9
Long thread that might not make any sense but long story short I feel like I've gone mad and now arrived at rehab. /10
Can I please be clear that Sweden is a county with 10m people with like 5x the size of the Netherlands. They're able to do this because they don't live on top of each other. NL still has 10k cases a day. WEAR A MASK. Wash your hands and keep distance.
