#Thread on Calcium defficiency, osteoporosis and dental treatment:

In the last one month, I have treated at least 4 females in their 60's, who have had serious Calcium defficiency. One of them is being treated for osteoporosis while two of them are borderline cases.
"Osteoporosis causes bones to become weak and brittle — so brittle that a fall or even mild stresses such as bending over or coughing can cause a fracture. Osteoporosis-related fractures most commonly occur in the hip, wrist or spine.
Bone is living tissue that is constantly being broken down and replaced. Osteoporosis occurs when the creation of new bone doesn't keep up with the loss of old bone." 

Source: https://t.co/mZvHwxEPfP.
Do read this article. That will keep the thread concise. 

One potential complication of low calcium levels is effect on bone healing and hence success rate of Dental Implants. 

It is still a controversial topic but I am not placing implants without a thorough discussion.
And a medical consult with the patient's physician. 

The most popular medication associated with treatment of osteoporosis is the "Bisphosphonates" group. 

Simply put they prevent the weakening of bones. They have been life saving for a lot of patients. Specially women.
How ever there is one major side effect that no one talks about enough. 

It is called BRONJ: Bisphosphonates Related OsteoNecrosis of the Jaws. 

Basically if a patient on these medications undergoes a surgical dental procedure, like an extraction or an implant, there is a risk
that the wound might not heal as the bone basically dies. 

The risk varies with the different medications but once again, a detailed conversation and a medical consult become essential. 

This is typically seen in elderly patients. Those are the most common age bracket who need
and can benefit tremendously from dental implants. 

So I urge all of you to regularly monitor your calcium levels, get bone density tests done and see your dentist regularly.

If you start seeing calcium defficiency in your bones, get all dental work done asap. 

I feel sad
when the patient has to compromise on dental rehabilitation due to medical reasons, specially those that are debilitating as it is. 

Moral of the story: 
1) People above the age of 50: Get calcium levels and bone density levels monitored regularly. 
2) See a dentist regularly.
3) Discuss with your physician and dentist about risk factors, early onset dental treatment etc. 
4) Educate young members in your family about taking care of their own health!

Hope this helps.
