THREAD

For @joris03129317

Here's what happens when nobody knows how anything works.

This is why @realDonaldTrump mocked Biden for Biden's comments on Wall Street. https://t.co/RTLDJczaXz
This is Biden's accusation:

"We find out in the New York Times that his folks went to Wall Street and said this is dangerous – and a memo out of that meeting, not from his administration, but from brokers said to sell short."
https://t.co/tJe4CHVQ3a
There's so much DUMB in Biden's statement and in this Twitter idiot's tweet that it's going to take me a while to dismantle it all.

I didn't read the New York Times for obvious reasons, so I don't know what the accusation is.
But anyone with a functioning brain knows that Trump DID NOT WANT A SELLOFF.

That would tank your 401k's and lead to layoffs.

Lending would become harder.

Projects would be canceled, leading to MORE unemployment.

The collapse would spread.
That's EXACTLY what happened in 2007-2008.

The accusation is that brokers advised their clients to "sell short," which shows that Biden knows ZERO about the economy.

He's totally misusing basic terminology.

I haven't seen the memo. Maybe I can find it.
The article is behind a pay wall, but here's a summary:
"White House economic staff met with board members of the conservative Hoover Institution, many of them GOP donors, and said the White House could not yet predict the virus’s effect on the economy."
"Following the meetings, hedge fund consultant William Callanan wrote a memo noting that nearly every economic adviser had brought up the virus "as a point of concern, totally unprovoked."
"As the document spread among investors, one said that their takeaway was "short everything."
https://t.co/XvB5r5uTom
This is why total ignorance is so dangerous.

A hedge-fund consultant is NOT a broker.

A broker MANAGES your accounts.

Investors are the stupidest, most terrified, conformist people on the planet.

I say that as a professional investor.
We need to OUTLAW machine trading.

It automatically sells stocks when the price drops to a certain point, THEREFORE SNOWBALLING THE FALL.

AND.

"Hedge funds" are NOT regular stocks and bonds. They aren't as regulated by the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC).
To buy hedge funds, you must be an "accredited investor."
In the US, they are:

"investors who are financially sophisticated and have a reduced need for the protection provided by regulatory disclosure filings. Accredited investors include natural high net worth individuals (HNWI), banks, insurance companies, brokers and trusts."
https://t.co/RwB7CEKcfV
You can therefore see WHY the White House briefed the Hoover Institution.

We DO NOT want accredited investors to be caught flatfooted.

That would cause a massive recession that would impact ALL OF US.
Hedge funds are used to protect oneself against the insanity of the stock market.

"Short selling" is when you borrow stocks or other assets that you think will LOSE value. The stocks or assets have an expiration date.
The expiration date is when the stocks or other assets must be returned to the owner.

You sell the stocks on the open market for the market value.

Then you buy them back for the reduced price and return them to the owner.
So you borrow $100 worth of stocks and sell them on the open market for $100. 

You pocket $100.

The market price drops to $25.

You buy them back for $25 and return them to the owner.

You get to keep $75.
