FUNCTIONAL NEUROLOGICAL DISORDER (FND): as the legal profession is want to say, “you can’t prove a negative”.  FND is a negative. https://t.co/Yhngq7lYF3
Over the course of my career in clinical medicine since 1967, I have encountered Neurologists and other medical specialists on countless occasions. Of course it is not good to generalize, but there seem to be certain characteristics common to Neurologists...
Neurologists are steeped in dogma. I believe that this relates to the primitive tools (by standards of future technology not yet invented) to image and measure neural functions. It is a cliche in clinical medicine that Neurologists can name conditions, but ....
Neurologists have precious understanding of why the nervous system has dysfunctions, to wit the brain is a vast sphere of mysterious activity. One common &amp; favored Neurology tool is the Nerve Conduction Test, NCT, a barbaric instrument that imparts torturing pain to patients.
Nerve Conduction Tests (NCT) are not only painful they are inexact. I was in clinical medicine for a decade or more before a Neurologist informed me a secret I had never heard before. The NCT only becomes positive after a nerve trunk has been dead for two weeks.
Nerve Conduction Tests monitor function of large peripheral nerve trunks. When electrical discharges are released by operator of tests, electromagnetic (EM) fields are so great that function of myriad nerve connections, endings, &amp; neural transducers are hidden behind EM noise.
Neurologist therefore have relatively crude tests of nervous system function. Common symptoms seen in medical practice are dysautonomias: migraine headaches, panic attacks, Gastroparesis, IBS, Interstitial Cystitis, Dysmenorrhea, etc.
Dysautonomias are mediated by autonomic nervous system, which are tissues squarely in sphere of Neurology clinical practice.  Unfortunately, analysis of dysautonomias requires in-depth history &amp; hands on analysis of living tissues; efforts not easily fit into 15 min. appts and...
Dysautonomias are not detected by blood tests nor by specialized electronic devices nor imaging studies. Therefore, dysautonomias are not easily discovered by objective.
Dysautonomias reflect intermittent impingements of autonomic nerve &amp; absent nerve cell death; not able to be detected by Nerve Conduction tests (NCT). Often, the osseous &amp; joint subluxations that arouse dysautonomias can be found by in-depth palpation, a lost medical art.
Neurologist, who are often cerebral sorts, often fall back onto the fallacy that, “absence of evidence is evidence of absence”. Psychological theories are convenient facades of explanations for patients. “Functional!”, they explain, while not looking well enough to the tissues.
Dysautonomias are often reflective of imbalance of activations of the two branches of the autonomic nervous system, the Sympathetic and the Parasympathetic. In my next threadreader, I will discuss use of cannabinoids to correct these imbalances &amp; to induce “homeostasis”.
